---
title: When Two Cars Collide
layout: posts
tags:
  - common misconceptions
  - collision force
  - vehicles
---

We have two identical Jeep Wranglers, both $167in$ long, and weighing $4,350lbs$. The Jeeps are both traveling down the same road at $50mph$ in opposite directions, the vehicles collide head-on. What is the force of that collision?

If you answered $100mph$ you aren't alone, but the answer is $50mph$.
This topic has been done by many people, notably MythBusters. But what hasn't been covered is why most people feel in their gut that must be true. That is, if two cars collide the force of the collision must equal combined speed of both vehicles. So why is it that nearly everyone gets this wrong?


The most amusing reason this is wrong is because if it were true it would imply a vehicle somehow *"knows"* what it is going to hit.


## Easier Case

One Jeep Wrangler weighing $3500lbs$ travels at $50mph$ in a straight line and plows right into a tree. The tree adds no speed to this interaction, so we have $0mph + 50mph = 50mph$. So we might be thinking *Well yea its only one vehicle of course*. If a moving object hits another object the force it hits that object with is the same regardless of what it hits or if that object was moving.

The force imparted by each object is a vector it has magnitude (size) and direction, $\mathbf{F} = ma$.

## Whats Missing

In order to adjust our intuition here we need to address why we believed it was true in the first place. Thinking from an additive perspective the reasoning might go along the lines of:
    * Two identical cars
    * Both traveling $50mph$
    * In opposite directions relative to one another (one negative, the other positive)
    * The two cars collide head-on
    * So we add $50mph$ to $50mph$ because both cars are forces acting on each other
    * Therefore, $100mph$

From a multiplicative view our reason might look like:
    * Two identical cars
    * Both traveling at $50mph$
    * In opposite directions relative to one another (one negative, the other positive)
    * The two cars collide head-on
    * So we have two cars traveling at $50mph$ acting on each other
    * Therefore, $2 \times 50mph = 100mph$.

## Why

The result is not intuitive when you think of it only in terms of moving vehicles.
From the additive perspective, two cars means two forces and the result force certainly must be large enough to accommodate the sum. Then the trap of wanting to use the 'sum of all forces' statement incorrectly by failing to set equality of both cars according to Newtons's conservation, $F_{1} = F_{2} \rightarrow F_{1} - F_{2} = 0$.

But its not way off-base this intuition. Reframe, car A acted on car B with a speed of $50mph$. At the same time, car B acted on car A with a speed of $50mph$.

Nothing disappeared, when you think of a two car collision as two different collisions acting independently you can see that force distributed from $A \rightarrow B$ and  from $B \rightarrow A$. What wasn't there was a third force representing the collision force as a whole.

That is where I think the intuition goes awry. We have two things that combine into a third kind of thing a wreck. Its tempting to think of the wreck as its own entity. That what we are measuring when we say *the force of a collision* is a third thing created by an event involving two objects. But there isn't a third object. There are two objects which acted on one another and then due to Newton's Laws of Motion, the eventually both stop.


This is Newton's Third Law, the one that says two forces of equal magnitude and opposite direction exert equal and opposite reactions to hitting each other.

\\[
F_{1,2} = -F_{2,1} \rightarrow F_{1,2} + F_{2,1} = 0
\\]

Either way the damage is done.
 - A car hitting a wall hits the wall with a force equal to its mass and speed.
 - A car hits another car it hits it with a force equal to its mass and speed.


If two identical cars heading in opposite directions collide they do so with a force equal to their mass and speed.

From a directional perspective since they are heading in opposite directions one of the forces is negative and one is positive.

This is why a two car head on collision at 50mph is equal to hitting a wall at $50mph$ not at $100mph$.
The intuitive third object doesn't exist, the answer is the same if you hit a car or a tree.
